---
layout: post
title: Machine Learning and Complex System Analysis
tags:
 - machine_learning
 - analysis
---

### How's going?

I have not made a post for a long time. Right now, I'm sitting on a C++ lecture and I figure I have some free time to do something fun. During the winter break, I set up a goal to finish watching a [machine learning class](http://see.stanford.edu/see/courseInfo.aspx?coll=348ca38a-3a6d-4052-937d-cb017338d7b1). For a month, I finished it, which I was quite proud of. It was a hard class, and It involved a lot of math. Two prerequites were required: probability and linear algebra. The probability class I studied by myself from a MIT open course, which was well taught(I'm joulous of MIT students - they have such good professors). I took linear algebra class in Stony Brook(not very thoroughly taught). Two prerequites were important to take the machine learning class, which was evident by how much of math was used in the class. At first It was very hard to follow what the professor was talking about - he wrote down huge amount of math and made complicated transformations. But after I went over lecture notes and re-watched what he said, I started to understand the material. While I was learning, I made a repo and implemented something machine learning algorithm as practices, which can be found [here](https://github.com/cjackie/machine_learning). I was a fun process, and I learned alot. But one thing is not good.... My eyesight has gotten worse. sigh.

### Machine learning

I've learned a bit about machine learning. I'm least qualifed to talk about it, but I'm going to do it anyway. :). So, what is machine learning? In my opinion, the title machine learning is kind of misleading. The field is more closely related to statistics. It's about how to recognize similar characteristics between data(classification) or discover relationships bettween data. Human are very good at this, however computers are not. To teach computers to do that, one tool can be deployed: math. I think it's the only way, because at the end what realy computers can do is only doing calculations. So, people build mathmatical models, for example linear regression model, which assumes that the relationships bettween the data is linear. Then, fit the data to the model by computing values of the parameters and then see if it works well. "works well" is actually a very tricky part and difficult to measure.

### Complex system

Math part of machine learning is interesting. But when it comes to applying machine learning models, I feel like it's just curve fitting in some sense. So I want to go on to learn about how to build models. To my surprise, model building has been existed for a long time from science to engineering(I had not thought of them as models). Scientists build models to explain the nature, and engineers build models to analyse complex systems. The language to do that is mathematics! After the realization, I shifted my goal from just writing software to building models(programming skill is needed. great). I was lucky that professor Djuric was willing to mentor me to do research with him for the summer, in which I will build a model to describe a biological system. It's going to be fun.
