---
layout: post
title: Consciousness and Subconsciousness
tags:
- Psychology
---

How can a mind think of subconsciousness, when the very definition of subconsciousness is something not conscious (reason about). I think we can think about subconsciousness. subconsciousness is a world where what-is is what-is-not, whereas consciousness is a world that has definite “shape” for every objects. That is why, it can be messy to think about subconsciousness in the way of consciousness, unless we think about it with the way of subconsciousness. <!--break-->

subconsciousness is a world that What-is is what-is-not. In a world of consciousness, We define things to help us navigate and make sense of the world. These things are only objects to consciousness. When we let the subconsciousness to take over, these objects start to mix together, or even disappear. That is particularly troubling to consciousness, because, the distinctions of every objects are the way consciousness knows how to think about . When consciousness meets the subconsciousness. It sees all forms of contradictions, with no way to make sense.

With consciousness and subconsciousness above, we can define two types of people. People who like me who are more using consciousness, and people who are more using subconsciousness. It is like a + b = 1, where a, and b are between 0  and 1. a and b are how much consciousness and subconsciousness a person has. People in art and humanity are more towards using subconsciousness way. While people in engineering and science are more towards using consciousness.
Personally, I saw too much contradictions in subconsciousness, due to my type. The result, at same point, was that it pushed me to to avoid subconsciousness or to bring it under consciousness, which was to have more contradictions. To break out of it, is to embrace subconsciousness, when thinking in it.

I had no idea what I was writing, and I knew what I was writing.



